
from Squarings: Lightenings


         i


Blackberry-Picking


for Philip Hobsbaum
Late August, given heavy rain and sun 
For a full week, the blackberries would ripen. 
At first, just one, a glossy purple clot 
Among others, red, green, hard as a knot. 
You ate that first one and its flesh was sweet 
Like thickened wine: summer's blood was in it 
Leaving stains upon the tongue and lust for 
Picking. Then red ones inked up and that hunger 
Sent us out with milk cans, pea tins, jam-pots 
Where briars scratched and wet grass bleached our boots. 
Round hayfields, cornfields and potato-drills 
We trekked and picked until the cans were full, 
Until the tinkling bottom had been covered 
With green ones, and on top big dark blobs burned 
Like a plate of eyes. Our hands were peppered 
With thorn pricks, our palms sticky as Bluebeard's. 

We hoarded the fresh berries in the byre. 
But when the bath was filled we found a fur, 
A rat-grey fungus, glutting on our cache. 
The juice was stinking too. Once off the bush 
The fruit fermented, the sweet flesh would turn sour. 
I always felt like crying. It wasn't fair 
That all the lovely canfuls smelt of rot. 
Each year I hoped they'd keep, knew they would not.


from Squarings: Lightenings


         i


Blackberry-Picking


for Philip Hobsbaum
Late August, given heavy rain and sun 
For a full week, the blackberries would ripen. 
At first, just one, a glossy purple clot 
Among others, red, green, hard as a knot. 
You ate that first one and its flesh was sweet 
Like thickened wine: summer's blood was in it 
Leaving stains upon the tongue and lust for 
Picking. Then red ones inked up and that hunger 
Sent us out with milk cans, pea tins, jam-pots 
Where briars scratched and wet grass bleached our boots. 
Round hayfields, cornfields and potato-drills 
We trekked and picked until the cans were full, 
Until the tinkling bottom had been covered 
With green ones, and on top big dark blobs burned 
Like a plate of eyes. Our hands were peppered 
With thorn pricks, our palms sticky as Bluebeard's. 

We hoarded the fresh berries in the byre. 
But when the bath was filled we found a fur, 
A rat-grey fungus, glutting on our cache. 
The juice was stinking too. Once off the bush 
The fruit fermented, the sweet flesh would turn sour. 
I always felt like crying. It wasn't fair 
That all the lovely canfuls smelt of rot. 
Each year I hoped they'd keep, knew they would not.


Casualty


I   

He would drink by himself   
And raise a weathered thumb   
Towards the high shelf,   
Calling another rum   
And blackcurrant, without   
Having to raise his voice,   
Or order a quick stout   
By a lifting of the eyes   
And a discreet dumb-show   
Of pulling off the top;   
At closing time would go   
In waders and peaked cap   
Into the showery dark,   
A dole-kept breadwinnerdole-kept breadwinner A person who brings in money through "dole": financial help or welfare from the state.   
But a natural for work.   
I loved his whole manner,   
Sure-footed but too sly,   
His deadpan sidlingsidling Not calling attention to one’s self, unobtrusive tact,   
His fisherman’s quick eye   
And turned observant back.   

Incomprehensible   
To him, my other life.   
Sometimes, on the high stool,   
Too busy with his knife   
At a tobacco plugtobacco plug “Tobacco pressed into a flat oblong cake or stick” (OED), which needs to be cut up and separated before smoking   
And not meeting my eye,   
In the pause after a slug   
He mentioned poetry.   
We would be on our own   
And, always politic   
And shy of condescension,   
I would manage by some trick   
To switch the talk to eels   
Or lore of the horse and cart   
Or the ProvisionalsProvisionals In 1969 the IRA (Irish Republican Army) split into two groups: the “provisionals” and the “officials”: “At the Army Convention of 1969 the militarists broke away over the issue of abstention and formed the provisional IRA, which became the dominant grouping, while the remainder became known as the officials” .   

But my tentative art   
His turned back watches too:   
He was blown to bits   
Out drinking in a curfew   
Others obeyed, three nights   
After they shot dead   
The thirteen men in Derry.   
PARAS THIRTEEN, the walls saidPARAS THIRTEEN, the walls said, / BOGSIDE NIL “Paras” is short for “Parachute Regiment.” According to A New Dictionary of Irish History from 1800, “On 30 January 1972 thirteen people were shot dead and seventeen injured within thirty minutes by British soldiers of the Parachute Regiment in the Bogside area of Derry”,   
BOGSIDE NIL PARAS THIRTEEN, the walls said, / BOGSIDE NIL “Paras” is short for “Parachute Regiment.” According to A New Dictionary of Irish History from 1800, “On 30 January 1972 thirteen people were shot dead and seventeen injured within thirty minutes by British soldiers of the Parachute Regiment in the Bogside area of Derry”. That Wednesday   
Everyone held   
His breath and trembled.   


                   II   

It was a day of cold   
Raw silence, wind-blown   
surplice and soutanesurplice and soutane A priest’s garments, the loose vestment (surplice) over the close-fitting one (soutane); by association, a priest:   
Rained-on, flower-laden   
Coffin after coffin   
Seemed to float from the door   
Of the packed cathedral   
Like blossoms on slow water.   
The common funeral   
Unrolled its swaddling band,   
Lapping, tightening   
Till we were braced and bound   
Like brothers in a ring.   

But he would not be held   
At home by his own crowd   
Whatever threats were phoned,   
Whatever black flags waved.   
I see him as he turned   
In that bombed offending place,   
Remorse fused with terror   
In his still knowable face,   
His cornered outfaced stare   
Blinding in the flash.   

He had gone miles away   
For he drank like a fish   
Nightly, naturally   
Swimming towards the lure   
Of warm lit-up places,   
The blurred mesh and murmur   
Drifting among glasses   
In the gregarious smoke.   
How culpable was he   
That last night when he broke   
Our tribe’s complicity?   
‘Now, you’re supposed to be   
An educated man,’   
I hear him say. ‘Puzzle me   
The right answer to that one.’ 


                   III   

I missed his funeral,   
Those quiet walkers   
And sideways talkers   
ShoalingShoaling Crowding and moving together as a group, like schools of fish out of his lane   
To the respectable   
Purring of the hearse...   
They move in equal pace   
With the habitual   
Slow consolation   
Of a dawdling engine,   
The line lifted, hand   
Over fist, cold sunshine   
On the water, the land   
Banked under fog: that morning   
I was taken in his boat,   
The Screw purlingScrew purling “Screw” is short for “screw propeller;” “purling” describes the motion of the propeller and swirling water , turning   
Indolent fathoms white,   
I tasted freedom with him.   
To get out early, haul   
Steadily off the bottom,   
DispraiseDispraise Opposite of praise, disparage, make little of  the catch, and smile   
As you find a rhythm   
Working you, slow mile by mile,   
Into your proper haunt   
Somewhere, well out, beyond...   

Dawn-sniffing revenantrevenant In Stepping Stones: Interviews with Seamus Heaney, Heaney described a fishing trip with Louis O’Neill and another person using this word: “The shine of morning light on the lough had an otherworldly quality, it reminded me of the dawn scene in Hamlet, when the ghost fades on the crowing of the cock – so in ‘Casualty’ Louis then turns into a ‘dawn-sniffing revenant’” ,   
PlodderPlodder “One who works slowly and laboriously; a persevering toiler, a drudge” (Century Dictionary) through midnight rain,   
Question me again.


Clearances


In Memoriam M.K.H., 1911-1984
She taught me what her uncle once taught her:
How easily the biggest coal block split
If you got the grain and hammer angled right.

The sound of that relaxed alluring blow, 
Its co-opted and obliterated echo,
Taught me to hit, taught me to loosen,

Taught me between the hammer and the block
To face the music. Teach me now to listen,
To strike it rich behind the linear black.

                                             1
A cobble thrown a hundred years ago
Keeps coming at me, the first stone
Aimed at a great-grandmother's turncoat brow.
The pony jerks and the riot's on.
She's crouched low in the trap
Running the gauntlet that first Sunday
Down the brae to Mass at a panicked gallop.
He whips on through the town to cries of 'Lundy!'

Call her 'The Convert'. 'The Exogamous Bride'.
Anyhow, it is a genre piece
Inherited on my mother's side
And mine to dispose with now she's gone.
Instead of silver and Victorian lace,
The exonerating, exonerated stone.

                                             2
Polished linoleum shone there. Brass taps shone.
The china cups were very white and big—
An unchipped set with sugar bowl and jug.
The kettle whistled. Sandwich and tea scone
Were present and correct. In case it run,
The butter must be kept out of the sun.
And don't be dropping crumbs. Don't tilt your chair.
Don't reach. Don't point. Don't make noise when you stir.

It is Number 5, New Row, Land of the Dead,
Where grandfather is rising from his place
With spectacles pushed back on a clean bald head
To welcome a bewildered homing daughter
Before she even knocks. 'What's this? What's this?'
And they sit down in the shining room together.

                                              3
When all the others were away at Mass
I was all hers as we peeled potatoes.
They broke the silence, let fall one by one
Like solder weeping off the soldering iron:
Cold comforts set between us, things to share
Gleaming in a bucket of clean water.
And again let fall. Little pleasant splashes
From each other's work would bring us to our senses.

So while the parish priest at her bedside
Went hammer and tongs at the prayers for the dying
And some were responding and some crying
I remembered her head bent towards my head,
Her breath in mine, our fluent dipping knives—
Never closer the whole rest of our lives.

                                               4
Fear of affectation made her affect 
Inadequacy whenever it came to 
Pronouncing words 'beyond her'. Bertold Brek.
She'd manage something hampered and askew 
Every time, as if she might betray
The hampered and inadequate by too
Well-adjusted a vocabulary.
With more challenge than pride, she'd tell me, 'You
Know all them things.' So I governed my tongue
In front of her, a genuinely well-
Adjusted adequate betrayal
Of what I knew better. I'd naw and aye
And decently relapse into the wrong
Grammar which kept us allied and at bay.

                                                5
The cool that came off sheets just off the line
Made me think the damp must still be in them
But when I took my corners of the linen
And pulled against her, first straight down the hem
And then diagonally, then flapped and shook
The fabric like a sail in a cross-wind,
They made a dried-out undulating thwack.
So we'd stretch and fold and end up hand to hand
For a split second as if nothing had happened
For nothing had that had not always happened
Beforehand, day by day, just touch and go,
Coming close again by holding back
In moves where I was x and she was o
Inscribed in sheets she'd sewn from ripped-out flour sacks.

                                               6
In the first flush of the Easter holidays
The ceremonies during Holy Week
Were highpoints of our Sons and Lovers phase.
The midnight fire. The paschal candlestick.
Elbow to elbow, glad to be kneeling next
To each other up there near the front
Of the packed church, we would follow the text
And rubrics for the blessing of the font.
As the hind longs for the streams, so my soul. . .
Dippings. Towellings. The water breathed on.
The water mixed with chrism and with oil.
Cruet tinkle. Formal incensation
And the psalmist's outcry taken up with pride:
Day and night my tears have been my bread.

                                                7
In the last minutes he said more to her
Almost than in all their life together.
'You'll be in New Row on Monday night
And I'll come up for you and you'll be glad
When I walk in the door . . . Isn't that right?'
His head was bent down to her propped-up head.
She could not hear but we were overjoyed.
He called her good and girl. Then she was dead,
The searching for a pulsebeat was abandoned
And we all knew one thing by being there.
The space we stood around had been emptied
Into us to keep, it penetrated
Clearances that suddenly stood open.
High cries were felled and a pure change happened.

                                                8
I thought of walking round and round a space
Utterly empty, utterly a source
Where the decked chestnut tree had lost its place
In our front hedge above the wallflowers.
The white chips jumped and jumped and skited high.
I heard the hatchet's differentiated
Accurate cut, the crack, the sigh
And collapse of what luxuriated
Through the shocked tips and wreckage of it all.
Deep-planted and long gone, my coeval
Chestnut from a jam jar in a hole,
Its heft and hush become a bright nowhere,
A soul ramifying and forever
Silent, beyond silence listened for.


Death of a Naturalist


All year the flax-dam festered in the heart
Of the townland; green and heavy headed
Flax had rotted there, weighted down by huge sods.
Daily it sweltered in the punishing sun.
Bubbles gargled delicately, bluebottles
Wove a strong gauze of sound around the smell.
There were dragonflies, spotted butterflies,
But best of all was the warm thick slobber
Of frogspawn that grew like clotted water
In the shade of the banks. Here, every spring
I would fill jampotfuls of the jellied
Specks to range on window sills at home,
On shelves at school, and wait and watch until
The fattening dots burst, into nimble
Swimming tadpoles. Miss Walls would tell us how
The daddy frog was called a bullfrog
And how he croaked and how the mammy frog
Laid hundreds of little eggs and this was
Frogspawn. You could tell the weather by frogs too
For they were yellow in the sun and brown
In rain.

    Then one hot day when fields were rank
With cowdung in the grass the angry frogs
Invaded the flax-dam; I ducked through hedges
To a coarse croaking that I had not heard
Before. The air was thick with a bass chorus.
Right down the dam gross bellied frogs were cocked
On sods; their loose necks pulsed like sails. Some hopped:
The slap and plop were obscene threats. Some sat
Poised like mud grenades, their blunt heads farting.
I sickened, turned, and ran. The great slime kings
Were gathered there for vengeance and I knew
That if I dipped my hand the spawn would clutch it.


Digging


Between my finger and my thumb   
The squat pen rests; snug as a gun. 

Under my window, a clean rasping sound   
When the spade sinks into gravelly ground:   
My father, digging. I look down 

Till his straining rump among the flowerbeds   
Bends low, comes up twenty years away   
Stooping in rhythm through potato drills   
Where he was digging. 

The coarse boot nestled on the lug, the shaft   
Against the inside knee was levered firmly. 
He rooted out tall tops, buried the bright edge deep 
To scatter new potatoes that we picked, 
Loving their cool hardness in our hands. 

By God, the old man could handle a spade.   
Just like his old man. 

My grandfather cut more turf in a day 
Than any other man on Toner’s bog. 
Once I carried him milk in a bottle 
Corked sloppily with paper. He straightened up 
To drink it, then fell to right away 
Nicking and slicing neatly, heaving sods 
Over his shoulder, going down and down 
For the good turf. Digging. 

The cold smell of potato mould, the squelch and slap 
Of soggy peat, the curt cuts of an edge 
Through living roots awaken in my head. 
But I’ve no spade to follow men like them. 

Between my finger and my thumb 
The squat pen rests. 
I’ll dig with it.


Glanmore Sonnets


For Ann Saddlemyer,  our heartiest welcomer
I 
Vowels ploughed into other: opened ground.   
The mildest February for twenty years   
Is mist bands over furrows, a deep no sound   
Vulnerable to distant gargling tractors. 
Our road is steaming, the turned-up acres breathe.   
Now the good life could be to cross a field   
And art a paradigm of earth new from the lathe   
Of ploughs. My lea is deeply tilled. 
Old ploughsocks gorge the subsoil of each sense   
And I am quickened with a redolence   
Of farmland as a dark unblown rose. 
Wait then...Breasting the mist, in sowers’ aprons,   
My ghosts come striding into their spring stations.   
The dream grain whirls like freakish Easter snows. 

                                  II 
Sensings, mountings from the hiding places,   
Words entering almost the sense of touch   
Ferreting themselves out of their dark hutch— 
‘These things are not secrets but mysteries,’   
Oisin Kelly told me years ago 
In Belfast, hankering after stone 
That connived with the chisel, as if the grain   
Remembered what the mallet tapped to know.   
Then I landed in the hedge-school of Glanmore   
And from the backs of ditches hoped to raise 
A voice caught back off slug-horn and slow chanter   
That might continue, hold, dispel, appease:   
Vowels ploughed into other, opened ground,   
Each verse returning like the plough turned round. 

                                  III 
This evening the cuckoo and the corncrake   
(So much, too much) consorted at twilight.   
It was all crepuscular and iambic.   
Out on the field a baby rabbit 
Took his bearings, and I knew the deer 
(I’ve seen them too from the window of the house,   
Like connoisseurs, inquisitive of air)   
Were careful under larch and May-green spruce.   
I had said earlier, ‘I won’t relapse   
From this strange loneliness I’ve brought us to.   
Dorothy and William—’ She interrupts:   
‘You’re not going to compare us two...?’   
Outside a rustling and twig-combing breeze   
Refreshes and relents. Is cadences. 

                                  IV 
I used to lie with an ear to the line 
For that way, they said, there should come a sound   
Escaping ahead, an iron tune 
Of flange and piston pitched along the ground,   
But I never heard that. Always, instead, 
Struck couplings and shuntings two miles away   
Lifted over the woods. The head 
Of a horse swirled back from a gate, a grey   
Turnover of haunch and mane, and I’d look   
Up to the cutting where she’d soon appear. 
Two fields back, in the house, small ripples shook   
Silently across our drinking water 
(As they are shaking now across my heart) 
And vanished into where they seemed to start. 

                                  V 
Soft corrugations in the boortree’s trunk, 
Its green young shoots, its rods like freckled solder:   
It was our bower as children, a greenish, dank 
And snapping memory as I get older. 
And elderberry I have learned to call it. 
I love its blooms like saucers brimmed with meal,   
Its berries a swart caviar of shot, 
A buoyant spawn, a light bruised out of purple.   
Elderberry? It is shires dreaming wine. 
Boortree is bower tree, where I played ‘touching tongues’ 
And felt another’s texture quick on mine. 
So, etymologist of roots and graftings, 
I fall back to my tree-house and would crouch 
Where small buds shoot and flourish in the hush. 

                                  VI 
He lived there in the unsayable lights. 
He saw the fuchsia in a drizzling noon, 
The elderflower at dusk like a risen moon 
And green fields greying on the windswept heights.   
‘I will break through,’ he said, ‘what I glazed over   
With perfect mist and peaceful absences’— 
Sudden and sure as the man who dared the ice   
And raced his bike across the Moyola River.   
A man we never saw. But in that winter 
Of nineteen forty-seven, when the snow 
Kept the country bright as a studio, 
In a cold where things might crystallize or founder,   
His story quickened us, a wild white goose 
Heard after dark above the drifted house. 

                                  VII 
Dogger, Rockall, Malin, Irish Sea: 
Green, swift upsurges, North Atlantic flux   
Conjured by that strong gale-warning voice,   
Collapse into a sibilant penumbra. 
Midnight and closedown. Sirens of the tundra, 
Of eel-road, seal-road, keel-road, whale-road, raise   
Their wind-compounded keen behind the baize   
And drive the trawlers to the lee of Wicklow.   
L’Etoile, Le Guillemot, La Belle Hélène   


Mid-Term Break


I sat all morning in the college sick bay
Counting bells knelling classes to a close.
At two o'clock our neighbours drove me home.

In the porch I met my father crying—
He had always taken funerals in his stride—
And Big Jim Evans saying it was a hard blow.

The baby cooed and laughed and rocked the pram
When I came in, and I was embarrassed
By old men standing up to shake my hand

And tell me they were 'sorry for my trouble'.
Whispers informed strangers I was the eldest,
Away at school, as my mother held my hand

In hers and coughed out angry tearless sighs.
At ten o'clock the ambulance arrived
With the corpse, stanched and bandaged by the nurses.

Next morning I went up into the room. Snowdrops
And candles soothed the bedside; I saw him
For the first time in six weeks. Paler now,

Wearing a poppy bruise on his left temple,
He lay in the four-foot box as in his cot.
No gaudy scars, the bumper knocked him clear.

A four-foot box, a foot for every year.


North


I returned to a long strand, 
the hammered curve of a bay,   
and found only the secular 
powers of the Atlantic thundering. 

I faced the unmagical 
invitations of Iceland, 
the pathetic colonies 
of Greenland, and suddenly 

those fabulous raiders, 
those lying in Orkney and Dublin   
measured against 
their long swords rusting, 

those in the solid 
belly of stone ships, 
those hacked and glinting 
in the gravel of thawed streams 

were ocean-deafened voices 
warning me, lifted again 
in violence and epiphany. 
The longship’s swimming tongue 

was buoyant with hindsight— 
it said Thor’s hammer swung 
to geography and trade, 
thick-witted couplings and revenges, 

the hatreds and behind-backs 
of the althing, lies and women,   
exhaustions nominated peace,   
memory incubating the spilled blood. 

It said, ‘Lie down 
in the word-hoard, burrow   
the coil and gleam 
of your furrowed brain. 

Compose in darkness.   
Expect aurora borealis   
in the long foray 
but no cascade of light. 

Keep your eye clear 
as the bleb of the icicle, 
trust the feel of what nubbed treasure   
your hands have known.’


Singing School


Fair seedtime had my soul, and I grew up Fostered alike by beauty and by fear; Much favoured in my birthplace, and no less In that beloved Vale to which, erelong, I was transplanted ... —WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, The Prelude  He [the stable-boy] had a book of Orange rhymes, and the days when we read them together in the hay-loft gave me the pleasure of rhyme for the first time. Later on I can remember being told, when there was a rumour of a Fenian rising, that rifles were being handed out to the Orangemen; and presently, when I began to dream of my future life, I thought I would like to die fighting the Fenians. —W. B. YEATS, Autobiographies
1. The Ministry of Fear 

       for Seamus Deane 

Well, as Kavanagh said, we have lived   
In important places. The lonely scarp 
Of St Columb’s College, where I billeted   
For six years, overlooked your Bogside. 
I gazed into new worlds: the inflamed throat   
Of Brandywell, its floodlit dogtrack,   
The throttle of the hare. In the first week   
I was so homesick I couldn’t even eat   
The biscuits left to sweeten my exile.   
I threw them over the fence one night   
In September 1951 
When the lights of houses in the Lecky Road   
Were amber in the fog. It was an act   
Of stealth. 
                  Then Belfast, and then Berkeley. 
Here’s two on’s are sophisticated, 
Dabbling in verses till they have become   
A life: from bulky envelopes arriving   
In vacation time to slim volumes 
Despatched `with the author’s compliments’. 
Those poems in longhand, ripped from the wire spine   
Of your exercise book, bewildered me— 
Vowels and ideas bandied free 
As the seed-pods blowing off our sycamores.   
I tried to write about the sycamores 
And innovated a South Derry rhyme 
With hushed and lulled full chimes for pushed and pulled.   
Those hobnailed boots from beyond the mountain   
Were walking, by God, all over the fine   
Lawns of elocution. 
                              Have our accents 
Changed? ‘Catholics, in general, don’t speak 
As well as students from the Protestant schools.’   
Remember that stuff? Inferiority 
Complexes, stuff that dreams were made on.   
‘What’s your name, Heaney?’ 
                                          ‘Heaney, Father.’ 
                                                                     ‘Fair 
Enough.’ 
             On my first day, the leather strap 
Went epileptic in the Big Study, 
Its echoes plashing over our bowed heads, 
But I still wrote home that a boarder’s life 
Was not so bad, shying as usual. 

On long vacations, then, I came to life   
In the kissing seat of an Austin 16 
Parked at a gable, the engine running,   
My fingers tight as ivy on her shoulders,   
A light left burning for her in the kitchen.   
And heading back for home, the summer’s   
Freedom dwindling night by night, the air   
All moonlight and a scent of hay, policemen   
Swung their crimson flashlamps, crowding round   
The car like black cattle, snuffing and pointing 
The muzzle of a Sten gun in my eye:   
‘What’s your name, driver?’ 
                                          ‘Seamus ...’ 
                                                         Seamus? 
They once read my letters at a roadblock 
And shone their torches on your hieroglyphics,   
‘Svelte dictions’ in a very florid hand. 

Ulster was British, but with no rights on   
The English lyric: all around us, though   
We hadn’t named it, the ministry of fear. 


2. A Constable Calls 

His bicycle stood at the window-sill,   
The rubber cowl of a mud-splasher   
Skirting the front mudguard, 
Its fat black handlegrips 

Heating in sunlight, the ‘spud’ 
Of the dynamo gleaming and cocked back,   
The pedal treads hanging relieved 
Of the boot of the law. 

His cap was upside down 
On the floor, next his chair. 
The line of its pressure ran like a bevel   
In his slightly sweating hair. 

He had unstrapped 
The heavy ledger, and my father   
Was making tillage returns 
In acres, roods, and perches. 

Arithmetic and fear. 
I sat staring at the polished holster   
With its buttoned flap, the braid cord   
Looped into the revolver butt. 

‘Any other root crops? 
Mangolds? Marrowstems? Anything like that?’   
‘No.’ But was there not a line 
Of turnips where the seed ran out 

In the potato field? I assumed 
Small guilts and sat 
Imagining the black hole in the barracks.   
He stood up, shifted the baton-case 

Farther round on his belt, 
Closed the domesday book, 
Fitted his cap back with two hands,   
And looked at me as he said goodbye. 

A shadow bobbed in the window.   
He was snapping the carrier spring   
Over the ledger. His boot pushed off   
And the bicycle ticked, ticked, ticked. 


3. Orange Drums, Tyrone, 1966 

The lambeg balloons at his belly, weighs 
Him back on his haunches, lodging thunder 
Grossly there between his chin and his knees.   
He is raised up by what he buckles under. 

Each arm extended by a seasoned rod, 
He parades behind it. And though the drummers   
Are granted passage through the nodding crowd,   
It is the drums preside, like giant tumours. 

To every cocked ear, expert in its greed, 
His battered signature subscribes ‘No Pope’. 
The goatskin’s sometimes plastered with his blood.   
The air is pounding like a stethoscope. 


4. Summer 1969 

While the Constabulary covered the mob   
Firing into the Falls, I was suffering 
Only the bullying sun of Madrid. 
Each afternoon, in the casserole heat 
Of the flat, as I sweated my way through   
The life of Joyce, stinks from the fishmarket   
Rose like the reek off a flax-dam. 
At night on the balcony, gules of wine, 
A sense of children in their dark corners, 
Old women in black shawls near open windows,   
The air a canyon rivering in Spanish. 
We talked our way home over starlit plains   
Where patent leather of the Guardia Civil   
Gleamed like fish-bellies in flax-poisoned waters. 

‘Go back,’ one said, ‘try to touch the people.’   
Another conjured Lorca from his hill. 
We sat through death-counts and bullfight reports   
On the television, celebrities 
Arrived from where the real thing still happened. 

I retreated to the cool of the Prado.   
Goya’s ‘Shootings of the Third of May’   
Covered a wall—the thrown-up arms   
And spasm of the rebel, the helmeted   
And knapsacked military, the efficient   
Rake of the fusillade. In the next room, 
His nightmares, grafted to the palace wall— 
Dark cyclones, hosting, breaking; Saturn   
Jewelled in the blood of his own children,   
Gigantic Chaos turning his brute hips   
Over the world. Also, that holmgang 
Where two berserks club each other to death   
For honour’s sake, greaved in a bog, and sinking. 
He painted with his fists and elbows, flourished 
The stained cape of his heart as history charged. 


5. Fosterage 

       for Michael McLaverty 

‘Description is revelation!’ Royal 
Avenue, Belfast, 1962, 
A Saturday afternoon, glad to meet 
Me, newly cubbed in language, he gripped   
My elbow. ‘Listen. Go your own way. 
Do your own work. Remember 
Katherine Mansfield—I will tell 
How the laundry basket squeaked

The Grauballe Man


As if he had been poured
in tar, he lies
on a pillow of turf
and seems to weep

the black river of himself.
The grain of his wrists
is like bog oak,
the ball of his heel

like a basalt egg.
His instep has shrunk
cold as a swan's foot
or a wet swamp root.

His hips are the ridge
and purse of a mussel,
his spine an eel arrested
under a glisten of mud.

The head lifts,
the chin is a visor
raised above the vent
of his slashed throat

that has tanned and toughened.
The cured wound
opens inwards to a dark
elderberry place.

Who will say 'corpse'
to his vivid cast?
Who will say 'body'
to his opaque repose?

And his rusted hair,
a mat unlikely
as a foetus's.
I first saw his twisted face

in a photograph,
a head and shoulder
out of the peat,
bruised like a forceps baby,

but now he lies 
perfected in my memory,
down to the red horn
of his nails,

hung in the scales
with beauty and atrocity:
with the Dying Gaul
too strictly compassed

on his shield,
with the actual weight
of each hooded victim,
slashed and dumped.


Fountains in the sea


Water: no matter how much, there is still not enough. 
Cunning life keeps asking for more and then a drop more. 
Our ankles are weighted with lead, we delve under the wave. 
We bend to our spades, we survive the force of the gusher. 

Our bodies fountain with sweat in the deeps of the sea, 
Our forehead aches and holds like a sunken prow. 
We are out of breath, divining the heart of the geyser, 
Constellations are bobbing like corks above on the swell. 

Earth is a waterwheel, the buckets go up and go down, 
But to keep the whole aqueous architecture standing its ground 
We must make a ring with our bodies and dance out a round 
On the dreamt eye of water, the dreamt eye of water, the dreamt eye of water. 

Water: no matter how much, there is still not enough. 
Come rain, come thunder, come deluged dams washed away, 
Our thirst is unquenchable. A cloud in the water’s a siren. 
We become two shades, deliquescent, drowning in song. 

My love, under the tall sky of hope 
Our love and our love alone 
Keeps dowsing for water. 
Sinking the well of each other, digging together. 
Each one the other’s phantom limb in the sea.


Pangur Bán


From the ninth-century Irish poem
Pangur Bán and I at work, 
Adepts, equals, cat and clerk: 
       His whole instinct is to hunt, 
       Mine to free the meaning pent. 

More than loud acclaim, I love 
Books, silence, thought, my alcove. 
       Happy for me, Pangur Bán 
       Child-plays round some mouse’s den. 

Truth to tell, just being here, 
Housed alone, housed together, 
       Adds up to its own reward: 
       Concentration, stealthy art. 

Next thing an unwary mouse 
Bares his flank: Pangur pounces. 
       Next thing lines that held and held 
       Meaning back begin to yield. 

All the while, his round bright eye 
Fixes on the wall, while I 
       Focus my less piercing gaze 
       On the challenge of the page. 

With his unsheathed, perfect nails 
Pangur springs, exults and kills. 
       When the longed-for, difficult
       Answers come, I too exult. 

So it goes. To each his own. 
No vying. No vexation. 
       Taking pleasure, taking pains, 
       Kindred spirits, veterans. 

Day and night, soft purr, soft pad, 
Pangur Bán has learned his trade. 
       Day and night, my own hard work 
       Solves the cruxes, makes a mark.

